---
layout: post
single_col_layout: true
title:  "Sets and Probability Measures"
modified: 2020-10-02
category: Probability
tags: ["notes", "math"]
logo: https://www.vedantu.com/question-sets/c72220ff-b957-409d-b182-8bf555a602b87900604316569559236.png
excerpt: "This note reviews the definition of probability measures using the set theory. It also reviews the concept of conditional probability."
---

## Event as sets
Probability studies the **repeatable (or ideal) experiments**. The result of an experiment is called an **outcome**.

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition 1.</b>
The set of all possible outcomes of an experiment is called the <b>sample space</b> and is denoted by $\Omega$.
</p></div>

### Cardinality of sets
The cardinality of a set $\Omega$ refers to the number of elements in this set, and is denoted by $\mathbf{card}(\Omega)$ or $\vert \Omega \vert$.
- For finite sets, $\mathbf{card}(\Omega)$ is a natural number.
- For the integer set, $\mathbf{card}(\mathbb{Z}) = \aleph_0$, which is countable.
- For the real number set, $\mathbf{card}(\mathbb{R}) = \aleph_1 > \aleph_0$.

The **power set** of a set $\Omega$ is the set of all subsets, which is denoted by $2^\Omega$.
- For $\\mathbb{Z}$, $\mathbf{card}(2^\mathbb{Z}) = \aleph_1 = \mathbf{card}(\mathbb{R})$.

In practical, sets in probability are: **finite**, **countable**, **reals** and their variants.

When we conduct an experiment, we want to know whether a subset occurs or not. For example, if we take a number from $\mathbb{R}$, the probability will be 0 because $\mathbf{card}(\mathbb{R})$ is very large. Therefore, **we are interested in $A \subset \Omega$ in probability, where $A$ is a collection of subsets in probability.**

### Events and fields
<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition 2.</b>
The <b>events</b> are subsets of the sample space $\Omega$. 
</p></div>

<div class="remark"><p><b>Remark.</b>
$\varnothing$ is called the <b>impossible event</b>. The set $\Omega$ is called the <b>certain event</b>. Events $A$ and $B$ are called <b>disjoint</b> if their intersection is the empty set.
</p></div>

We do not need all the subsets of $\Omega$ be events. It suffices for us to think of the collection of events as a subcollection $\mathcal{F}$ of the set of all subsets of $\Omega$.

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition 3.</b>
Any collection $\mathcal{F}$ of subsets of $\Omega$ which satisfies the following three conditions is called a field:
<ol>
    <li> if $A, B \in \mathcal{F}$, then $A \cup B \in \mathcal{F}$ and $A \cap B \in \mathcal{F}$ (actually $A\cap B \in \mathcal{F}$ is redundant);</li>
    <li> if $A \in \mathcal{F}$, then $A^c \in \mathcal{F}$;</li>
    <li> the empty set $\varnothing$ belongs to $\mathcal{F}$.</li>
</ol>
</p></div>

<div class="remark"><p><b>Remark.</b>
Some implications from the properties of a filed $\mathcal{F}$:
<ul>
    <li> if $A_1, \dots, A_n \in \mathcal{F}$, then $\bigcup_{i=1}^n A_i \in \mathcal{F}$;</li>
    <li> $\varnothing^C = \Omega \in \mathcal{F}$;</li>
    <li> $A \cap B = (A^c \cup B^c)^C \in \mathcal{F}$.</li>
</ul>
</p></div>

what if we have an $\Omega$ such that $\mathbf{card}(\Omega) = \aleph_0$? In this case, we may need $2^\Omega$ to study the probability. 

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition 4.</b>
A collection $\mathcal{F}$ of subsets of $\Omega$ is called a $\sigma$-field if it satisfies the following conditions: 
<ol>
    <li> $\varnothing \in \mathcal{F}$;</li>
    <li> if $A \in \mathcal{F}$, then $A^c \in \mathcal{F}$;</li>
    <li> if $A_1, A_2, \dots \in \mathcal{F}$, then $\bigcup_{i=1}^\infty A_i \in \mathcal{F}$.</li>
</ol>
</p></div>

<div class="remark"><p><b>Remark. </b>
$\sigma$-fields are closed under the operation of taking countable intersections.
</p></div>

<div class="example"><p><b>Example. </b>
The smallest $\sigma$-field associated with $\Omega$ is the collection $\mathcal{F} = \{\varnothing, \Omega \}$.
</p>

<p>
If $A \subset \Omega$, then $\mathcal{F} = \{\varnothing, A, A^c, \Omega \}$ is a $\sigma$-field. 
</p>

<p>
The power set of $\Omega$ is a $\sigma$-field.
</p></div>

With any experiment we may associate a pair $\{\Omega, \mathcal{F}\}$, where $\Omega$ is the set of all possible outcomes or elementary events and $\mathcal{F}$ is a $\sigma$-field of subsets of $\Omega$ which contains \emph{all the events in whose occurrences we may be interested}; henceforth, to call a set $A$ an event is equivalent to asserting that $A$ belongs to the $\sigma$-field in question. 


## Probability
Assume we have a "repeatable" experiment and we repeat the experiment a large number $N$ of times. Let $A \in \Omega$ and $N(A)$ be the number of $A$ occurs in the $N$ trails. Intuitively, the ratio $N(A)/ N$ appears to converge to a constant limit as $N$ increases. In practice, we have 
<ul>
    <li> $0 \leq N(A)/ N \leq 1$;</li>
    <li> if $A, B$ are disjoint, then $N(A \cup B) = N(A) + N(B)$. (finite additive and countably additive)</li>
</ul>

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition 5. </b>
A <b>probability measure</b> $\mathbf{P}$ on $\{ \Omega, \mathcal{F} \}$ is a function $\mathbf{P} : \mathcal{F} \to [0,1]$ satisfying
<ol>
    <li> $\mathbf{P}(\varnothing) = 0$;</li>
    <li> $\mathbf{P}(\Omega) = 1$;</li>
    <li> if $A_1, A2, \dots$ is a collection of disjoint members of $\mathcal{F}$, in that $A_i \cap A_j = \varnothing$ for all pairs $i, j$ satisfying $i \neq j$, then
    \begin{equation*}
        \mathbf{P}\left( \bigcup_{i=1}^\infty A_i \right) = \sum_{i=1}^\infty \mathbf{P} (A_i).
    \end{equation*}</li>
</ol>
</p></div>

The triple $\{ \Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbf{P} \}$, comprising a set $\Omega$, a $\sigma$-field $\mathcal{F}$ of subsets of $\Omega$, and a probability measure $\mathbf{P}$ on $\{\Omega, \mathcal{F}\}$, is called a \textbf{probability space}. We can associate a probability space $\{ \Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbf{P} \}$ with any experiment, and all questions associated with the experiment can be reformulated in terms of this space. 

<div class="remark"><p><b>Remark.</b>
A probability measure is a special example of what is called a \emph{measure} on the pair $\{\Omega, \mathcal{F}\}$. A measure is a function $\mu: \mathcal{F} \to [0, \infty)$ satisfying $\mu(\varnothing) = 0$ together with (c) above. A measure $\mu$ is a probability measure if $\mu(\Omega) = 1$. 
</p></div>

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Lemma.</b>
We can deduce some lemmas from the definition.
<ol>
    <li> $\mathbf{P}(A^c) = 1 - \mathbf{P}(A)$;</li>
    <li> if $A \subseteq B$, then $\mathbf{P}(B) = \mathbf{P}(A) + \mathbf{P}(B\backslash A) \geq \mathbf{P}(A)$;</li>
    <li> $\mathbf{P}(A \cup B) = \mathbf{P}(A) + \mathbf{P}(B) - \mathbf{P}(A \cap B)$;</li>
    <li> more generally, if $A_1, A_2, \dots, A_n$ are events, then 
    \begin{equation*}
        \begin{split}
        \mathbf{P}\left( \bigcup_{i=1}^n A_i \right) =& \sum_{i}\mathbf{P}(A_i) - \sum_{i < j} \mathbf{P}(A_i \cap A_j) + \sum_{i<j<k} \mathbf{P}(A_i \cap A_j \cap A_k) - \cdots \\
        & +(-1)^{n+1} \mathbf{P}(A_1 \cap A_2 \cap \cdots \cap A_n)
        \end{split}
    \end{equation*}</li>
</ol>
</p></div>

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Lemma.</b>
Let $A_1, A_2, \dots$ be an increasing sequence of events, so that $A_1 \subset A_2 \subset A_3 \subset \cdots$, and write $A$ for their limit:
\begin{equation*}
    A = \bigcup_{i=1}^\infty A_i = \lim_{i \to \infty} A_i.
\end{equation*}
Then $\mathbf{P}(A) = \lim_{i\to\infty} \mathbf{P}(A_i)$. 

Similarly, if $B_1, B_2, \dots$ is a decreasing sequence of events, so that $B_1 \supseteq  B_2 \supseteq B_3 \supseteq \cdots$, then 
\begin{equation*}
    B = \bigcap_{i=1}^\infty B_i = \lim_{i \to \infty} B_i
\end{equation*}
satisfies $\mathbf{P}(B) = \lim_{i\to\infty} \mathbf{P}(B_i)$
</p></div>


## Some useful concepts
### Conditional probability
What if we only care how many times does $A$ occur only when $B$ occurs? $N(A\cap B) / N(B)$, the universe is changed. 
<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition. </b>
If $\mathbf{P}(B) > 0$, then the \textbf{conditional probability} that $A$ occurs given that $B$ occurs is defined to be
\begin{equation*}
    \mathbf{P}(A \vert B) = \frac{\mathbf{P}(A \cap B)}{\mathbf{P}(B)}.
\end{equation*}
</p></div>

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition 6.</b>
Suppose $\{B_i\}$ is a finite set. If $B_i$ are all disjoint and $\bigcup_{i=1}^n B_i = \Omega$, then $\{B_i\}$ is called a \textbf{partition} of $\Omega$.
</p></div>

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Lemma.</b>
For any events $A$ and $B$ such that $0 < \mathbf{P}(B) < 1$,
\begin{equation*}
    \mathbf{P}(A) = \mathbf{P}(A \vert B) \mathbf{P}(B) + \mathbf{P}(A \vert B^c) \mathbf{P}(B^c).
\end{equation*}
More generally, let $B_1,  B_2, \dots, B_n$ be a partition of $\Omega$ such that $\mathbf{P}(B_i) > O$ for all $i$. Then 
\begin{equation*}
    \mathbf{P}(A) = \sum_i \mathbf{P}(A \vert B_i) \mathbf{P}(B_i).
\end{equation*}
</p></div>


### Independence
Intuition: an event $A$ occurs doesn't affect the probability of $A$ occurs when $B$ occurs, which means $\mathbf{P}(A) = \mathbf{P}(A\vert B)$.

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition 7.</b>
Events $A$ and $B$ are called <b>independent</b> if 
\begin{equation*}
    \mathbf{P}(A \cap B) = \mathbf{P}(A) \mathbf{P}(B).
\end{equation*}
More generally, a family $\{A_i \vert i \in I\}$ is called independent if
\begin{equation*}
    \mathbf{P} \left( \bigcap_{i \in J} A_i \right) = \prod_{i\in J} \mathbf{P}(A_i)
\end{equation*}
for all finite subsets $J$ of $I$. 
</p></div>

<div class="remark"><p><b>Remark. </b>
A common student error is to make the fallacious statement that $A$ and $B$ are independent if $A \cap B = \varnothing$.
</p></div>

<div class="remark"><p><b>Remark. </b>
If the family $\{A_i \vert i \in I\}$ has the property that 
for all 
\begin{equation*}
    \mathbf{P}(A_i \cap A_j) = \mathbf{P}(A_i) \mathbf{P}(A_j) \quad \forall i\neq j, 
\end{equation*}
then it is called \emph{pairwise independent}. <b>Pairwise-independent families are not necessarily independent.</b> 
</p></div>

## Completeness and product space
<div class="theorem"><p><b>Lemma. </b>
If $\mathcal{F}$ and $\mathcal{G}$ are two $\sigma$-fields of subsets of $\Omega$, then their intersection $\mathcal{F} \cap \mathcal{G}$ is a $\sigma$-field also. More generally, if $\{ \mathcal{F}_i \vert  i \in I \}$ is a family of $\sigma$-fields of subsets of $\Omega$, then $\mathcal{G} = \bigcap_{i\in I} \mathcal{F}_i $ is a $\sigma$-field also. 
</p></div>

**Completeness**: 
Let $\{\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbf{P}\}$ be a probability space. Any event $A$ which has zero probability, that is $\mathbf{P}(A) = 0$, is called \emph{null}. It may seem reasonable to suppose that any subset $B$ of a null set $A$ will itself be null, but this may be without meaning since $B$ may not be an event, and thus $\mathbf{P}(B)$ may not be defined. 

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition 8.</b>
A probability space $\{\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbf{P}\}$ is called <b>complete</b> if all subsets of null sets are events. 
</p></div>

Any incomplete space can be completed thus. Let $\mathcal{N}$ be the collection of all subsets of null sets in $\mathcal{F}$ and let $\mathcal{G} = \sigma (\mathcal{F} \cup \mathcal{N})$ be the smallest $\sigma$-field which contains all sets in $\mathcal{F}$ 
and $\mathcal{N}$. It can be shown that the domain of $\mathbf{P}$ may be extended in an obvious way from $\mathcal{F}$ to $\mathcal{G}$; $\{\Omega, \mathcal{G}, \mathbf{P}\}$ is called the completion of $\{\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbf{P}\}$. 

**Product space**:
Suppose two experiments have associated probability spaces $\{ \Omega_1, \mathcal{F}_1, \mathbf{P}_1 \}$ and  $\{ \Omega_2, \mathcal{F}_2, \mathbf{P}_2 \}$ respectively. The sample space of the pair of experiments, considered jointly, is the collection $\Omega_1 \times \Omega_2 = \{ (\omega_1 , \omega_2) \vert w_1 \in \Omega_1, \omega_2 \in \Omega_2 \}$ of ordered pairs. The appropriate $\sigma$-field of events is \textbf{more complicated} to construct. \textbf{The family of all such sets, $\mathcal{F}_1 \times \mathcal{F}_2 = \{A_1 \times A_2 \vert A_1 \in \mathcal{F}_1 , A_1 \in \mathcal{F}_2 \}$, is NOT in general a $\sigma$-field.

<div class="remark"><p><b>Remark.</b>
There exists a unique smallest $\sigma$-field $\mathcal{G} = \sigma(\mathcal{F}_1 \times \mathcal{F}_2)$ of subsets of $\Omega_1 \times \Omega_2$ which contains $\mathcal{F}_1 \times \mathcal{F}_2$. All we require now is a suitable probability function on $( \Omega1 \times \Omega_2, \mathcal{G} )$. Let $\mathbf{P}_{12}: \mathcal{F}_1 \times \mathcal{F}_2 \to [0, 1]$ be given by: 
\begin{equation*}
    \mathbf{P}(A_1 \times A_2) = \mathbf{P}_1(A_1) \times \mathbf{P}_2(A_2) \quad \text{for $A_1 \in \mathcal{F}_1, A_2 \in \mathcal{F}_2$}.
\end{equation*}
It can be shown that the domain of $\mathbf{P}_{12}$ can be extended from $\mathcal{F}_1 \times \mathcal{F}_2$ to the whole of $\mathcal{G} = \sigma(\mathcal{F}_1 \times \mathcal{F}_2)$.
</p></div>

<div class="theorem"><p><b>Definition 9.</b>
The probability space $(\mathcal{F}_1 \times \mathcal{F}_2, \mathcal{G}, \mathbf{P}_{12})$ is called the <b>product space</b> of $(\Omega_1, \mathcal{F}_1, \mathbf{P}_1)$ and  $(\Omega_2, \mathcal{F}_2, \mathbf{P}_2)$. The measure $\mathbf{P}_{12}$ is sometimes called the `product measure'. 
</p></div>